If anyone is curious about my local settings, let it be recorded that St
Bertrand de Comminges and Viborg are real places: that in 'Oh, Whistle,
and I'll Come to You' I had Felixstowe in mind. As for the fragments of
ostensible erudition which are scattered about my pages, hardly anything
in them is not pure invention; there never was, naturally, any such book
as that which I quote in 'The Treasure of Abbot Thomas'. 'Canon Alberic's
Scrap-book' was written in 1894 and printed soon after in the _National
Review_, 'Lost Hearts' appeared in the _Pall Mall Magazine_; of the next
five stories, most of which were read to friends at Christmas-time at
King's College, Cambridge, I only recollect that I wrote 'Number 13 in
while 'The Treasure of Abbot Thomas' was composed in the summer of


CANON ALBERIC'S SCRAP-BOOK

St Bertrand de Comminges is a decayed town on the spurs of the Pyrenees,
not very far from Toulouse, and still nearer to Bagnères-de-Luchon. It
was the site of a bishopric until the Revolution, and has a cathedral
which is visited by a certain number of tourists. In the spring of 1883
an Englishman arrived at this old-world place--I can hardly dignify it
with the name of city, for there are not a thousand inhabitants. He was a
Cambridge man, who had come specially from Toulouse to see St Bertrand's
Church, and had left two friends, who were less keen archaeologists than
himself, in their hotel at Toulouse, under promise to join him on the
following morning. Half an hour at the church would satisfy _them_, and
all three could then pursue their journey in the direction of Auch. But
our Englishman had come early on the day in question, and proposed to
himself to fill a note-book and to use several dozens of plates in the
process of describing and photographing every corner of the wonderful
church that dominates the little hill of Comminges. In order to carry out
this design satisfactorily, it was necessary to monopolize the verger of
the church for the day. The verger or sacristan (I prefer the latter
appellation, inaccurate as it may be) was accordingly sent for by the
somewhat brusque lady who keeps the inn of the Chapeau Rouge; and when he
came, the Englishman found him an unexpectedly interesting object of
study. It was not in the personal appearance of the little, dry, wizened
old man that the interest lay, for he was precisely like dozens of other
church-guardians in France, but in a curious furtive or rather hunted and
oppressed air which he had. He was perpetually half glancing behind him;
the muscles of his back and shoulders seemed to be hunched in a continual
nervous contraction, as if he were expecting every moment to find himself
in the clutch of an enemy. The Englishman hardly knew whether to put him
down as a man haunted by a fixed delusion, or as one oppressed by a
guilty conscience, or as an unbearably henpecked husband. The
probabilities, when reckoned up, certainly pointed to the last idea; but,
still, the impression conveyed was that of a more formidable persecutor
even than a termagant wife.

However, the Englishman (let us call him Dennistoun) was soon too deep in
his note-book and too busy with his camera to give more than an
occasional glance to the sacristan. Whenever he did look at him, he found
him at no great distance, either huddling himself back against the wall
or crouching in one of the gorgeous stalls. Dennistoun became rather
fidgety after a time. Mingled suspicions that he was keeping the old man
from his _déjeuner_, that he was regarded as likely to make away with St
Bertrand's ivory crozier, or with the dusty stuffed crocodile that hangs
over the font, began to torment him.

'Won't you go home?' he said at last; 'I'm quite well able to finish my
notes alone; you can lock me in if you like. I shall want at least two
hours more here, and it must be cold for you, isn't it?'

'Good heavens!' said the little man, whom the suggestion seemed to throw
into a state of unaccountable terror, 'such a thing cannot be thought of
for a moment. Leave monsieur alone in the church? No, no; two hours,
three hours, all will be the same to me. I have breakfasted, I am not at
all cold, with many thanks to monsieur.'

'Very well, my little man,' quoth Dennistoun to himself: 'you have been
warned, and you must take the consequences.'

Before the expiration of the two hours, the stalls, the enormous
dilapidated organ, the choir-screen of Bishop John de, the
remnants of glass and tapestry, and the objects in the treasure-chamber
had been well and truly examined; the sacristan still keeping at
Dennistoun's heels, and every now and then whipping round as if he had
been stung, when one or other of the strange noises that trouble a large
empty building fell on his ear. Curious noises they were, sometimes.

'Once,' Dennistoun said to me, 'I could have sworn I heard a thin
metallic voice laughing high up in the tower. I darted an inquiring
glance at my sacristan. He was white to the lips. "It is he--that is--it
is no one; the door is locked," was all he said, and we looked at each
other for a full minute.'

Another little incident puzzled Dennistoun a good deal. He was examining
a large dark picture that hangs behind the altar, one of a series
illustrating the miracles of St Bertrand. The composition of the picture
is well-nigh indecipherable, but there is a Latin legend below, which
runs thus:

Dennistoun was turning to the sacristan with a smile and a jocular remark
of some sort on his lips, but he was confounded to see the old man on his
knees, gazing at the picture with the eye of a suppliant in agony, his
hands tightly clasped, and a rain of tears on his cheeks. Dennistoun
naturally pretended to have noticed nothing, but the question would not
go away from him,'Why should a daub of this kind affect anyone so
strongly?' He seemed to himself to be getting some sort of clue to the
reason of the strange look that had been puzzling him all the day: the
man must be a monomaniac; but what was his monomania?

It was nearly five o'clock; the short day was drawing in, and the church
began to fill with shadows, while the curious noises--the muffled
footfalls and distant talking voices that had been perceptible all
day--seemed, no doubt because of the fading light and the consequently
quickened sense of hearing, to become more frequent and insistent.

The sacristan began for the first time to show signs of hurry and
impatience. He heaved a sigh of relief when camera and note-book were
finally packed up and stowed away, and hurriedly beckoned Dennistoun to
the western door of the church, under the tower. It was time to ring the
Angelus. A few pulls at the reluctant rope, and the great bell Bertrande,
high in the tower, began to speak, and swung her voice up among the pines
and down to the valleys, loud with mountain-streams, calling the dwellers
on those lonely hills to remember and repeat the salutation of the angel
to her whom he called Blessed among women. With that a profound quiet
seemed to fall for the first time that day upon the little town, and
Dennistoun and the sacristan went out of the church.
On the doorstep they fell into conversation.

Monsieur seemed to interest himself in the old choir-books in the
sacristy.

Undoubtedly. I was going to ask you if there were a library in the
town.

No, monsieur; perhaps there used to be one belonging to the Chapter, but
it is now such a small place--' Here came a strange pause of
irresolution, as it seemed; then, with a sort of plunge, he went on: 'But
if monsieur is _amateur des vieux livres_, I have at home something that
might interest him. It is not a hundred yards.

At once all Dennistoun's cherished dreams of finding priceless
manuscripts in untrodden corners of France flashed up, to die down again
the next moment. It was probably a stupid missal of Plantin's printing,
about 1580. Where was the likelihood that a place so near Toulouse would
not have been ransacked long ago by collectors? However, it would be
foolish not to go; he would reproach himself for ever after if he
refused. So they set off. On the way the curious irresolution and sudden
determination of the sacristan recurred to Dennistoun, and he wondered in
a shamefaced way whether he was being decoyed into some purlieu to be
made away with as a supposed rich Englishman. He contrived, therefore, to
begin talking with his guide, and to drag in, in a rather clumsy fashion,
the fact that he expected two friends to join him early the next morning.
To his surprise, the announcement seemed to relieve the sacristan at once
of some of the anxiety that oppressed him.

That is well,' he said quite brightly--'that is very well. Monsieur will
travel in company with his friends: they will be always near him. It is a
good thing to travel thus in company--sometimes.'

The last word appeared to be added as an afterthought and to bring with
it a relapse into gloom for the poor little man.

They were soon at the house, which was one rather larger than its
neighbours, stone-built, with a shield carved over the door, the shield
of Alberic de Mauléon, a collateral descendant, Dennistoun tells me, of
Bishop John de Mauléon. This Alberic was a Canon of Comminges from 1680
to 1701. The upper windows of the mansion were boarded up, and the whole
place bore, as does the rest of Comminges, the aspect of decaying age.

Arrived on his doorstep, the sacristan paused a moment.


The door was opened at this point, and a face looked out, a face far
younger than the sacristan's, but bearing something of the same
distressing look: only here it seemed to be the mark, not so much of fear
for personal safety as of acute anxiety on behalf of another. Plainly the
owner of the face was the sacristan's daughter; and, but for the
expression I have described, she was a handsome girl enough. She
brightened up considerably on seeing her father accompanied by an
able-bodied stranger. A few remarks passed between father and daughter of
which Dennistoun only caught these words, said by the sacristan: 'He was
laughing in the church,' words which were answered only by a look of
terror from the girl.

But in another minute they were in the sitting-room of the house, a
small, high chamber with a stone floor, full of moving shadows cast by a
wood-fire that flickered on a great hearth. Something of the character of
an oratory was imparted to it by a tall crucifix, which reached almost to
the ceiling on one side; the figure was painted of the natural colours,
the cross was black. Under this stood a chest of some age and solidity,
and when a lamp had been brought, and chairs set, the sacristan went to
this chest, and produced therefrom, with growing excitement and
nervousness, as Dennistoun thought, a large book, wrapped in a white
cloth, on which cloth a cross was rudely embroidered in red thread. Even
before the wrapping had been removed, Dennistoun began to be interested
by the size and shape of the volume. 'Too large for a missal,' he
thought, 'and not the shape of an antiphoner; perhaps it may be something
good, after all.' The next moment the book was open, and Dennistoun felt
that he had at last lit upon something better than good. Before him lay a
large folio, bound, perhaps, late in the seventeenth century, with the
arms of Canon Alberic de Mauléon stamped in gold on the sides. There may
have been a hundred and fifty leaves of paper in the book, and on almost
every one of them was fastened a leaf from an illuminated manuscript.
Such a collection Dennistoun had hardly dreamed of in his wildest
moments. Here were ten leaves from a copy of Genesis, illustrated with
pictures, which could not be later than A.D. Further on was a
complete set of pictures from a Psalter, of English execution, of the
very finest kind that the thirteenth century could produce; and, perhaps
best of all, there were twenty leaves of uncial writing in Latin, which,
as a few words seen here and there told him at once, must belong to some
very early unknown patristic treatise. Could it possibly be a fragment of
the copy of Papias 'On the Words of Our Lord', which was known to have
existed as late as the twelfth century at Nimes?



It all seems so long ago. But the excitement of it in my gut is a memory
whose recall exceeds anything I ever encounter on the internet anymore,
or even in the last decade.

It began with a "work from home" PC XT running God knows what level of DOS,
a monochrome monitor with obvious cursor burn marks, and a 1200 baud modem or
was it bits per second? I'm not sure I ever knew the difference, in a bedroom
of a rented duplex on Mackey Road in Highland, New York, in roughly.

I'm not even sure how I came to know of the first local BBS phone number. After
all, it wasn't like you could just jump online and search. Probably from some
zine about BBS's obtained from the surprisingly decent magazine rack at
Barnes and Noble on Route 9 in the Town of Poughkeepsie then located just
between South Hills Mall and the new Galleria Mall - I think a pet supply
store opened there after Barnes and Noble relocated north a few miles.

As I recall, most of the BBS's of the Mid Hudson Valley were single phone
line, running Genesis Deluxe (I had to search to help me remember that
name). The only sysop name coming to mind is John Simon, based in Wappingers
Falls. He was a wonderfully crazy guy who smoked cigars and whom I recall
hosting a BBS get-together at a VFW in Wappingers Falls. I attended that,
and one other such gathering, which took place at the Ground Round that was
located on Route 9 about half a mile north of Spackenkill Road.

Somewhere along the line I met "The Reverend F-Squared", with whom I chummed a
little, and who insisted that I participate on a board called "TINY", which
I believe lived on "the other side of the river", probably in Newburgh or
Beacon, New York.

TINY had at least two phone lines, and I *think* ran Phoenix. Whatever it
was, I never really cared for the software relative to Genesis Deluxe. But
of course to each their own.

The Reverend F-Squared introduced me to several others. I'm only remembering
the handles "Honey" and "Squire", though.

I don't remember anything about "Squire". But "Honey" was incredibly gifted
in what might be called "sex chat". And of course when I finally met her she
was utterly unattractive to me. But she was definitely a master of the genre.

I managed to scarf up a color monitor from work at some point, which of
course made a huge difference (although in many ways I preferred the green
monochrome... I'm remembering it being "sharper", for one thing).

Somewhere along the line I learned of GE's "GEnie" online system, and I recall
how disappointed other BBSers were when I started saying that I'd probably
be heading more that direction, just because the audience was so much greater.

I purchased an "Amstrad PC". It had a popout LCD screen, and two floppy
drives. Probably 640 Meg of memory.

I did GEnie while continuing the local BBS scene to some degree. And then
someone started "mhv.net" (internet), which of course wound up being the
beginning of the end of my local involvement.

I don't think there was any way to connect to mhv.net via DOS, so I somehow
wound up with floppies containing the Slackware linux distro, and installed
it on a computer of my own (I'm remembering a 486 tower system).

I say all that just to give temporal perspective on my online journey.

As I said earlier, there was something intensely exciting about connecting to
a local BBS and using a handle. I distinctly remember it coming down to being
either "The Fool on the Hill" or "Mean Mister Mustard". I wound up favoring
the latter, with its implication that I might become ornery in replies.
Others quickly began calling me "M Cubed" or "M". I wound up carrying the
Mean Mister Mustard handle into what became years of posting in USENET.

There was the excitement of waiting for a line to be available, the excitement
of whether or not the connect would be successful. It often wasn't, and of
course that was quickly followed by the excitement of whether someone else
had snuck in and gotten hold of the line while you were redialing. Then the
excitement of whether there were any messages (or was mail), of looking at
new forums, of whether or not to chat with the sysop.

I then lived in a place far from where I grew up, and of course couldn't afford
long-distance to more remote BBSes. But none of my friends were anywhere
near doing such things anyway. What I'm looking back at with amazement
now, is that to even discuss such things meant a long-distance phone call
or snail mail. That's all there was.

So between neither old friends nor my (then) wife (also non-techie) having
anything to do with said online world(s), there was also the excitement of
being someone entirely new, in worlds where entirely new ways of interacting
and terminology to go with them - were still being invented.

I wish I could remember more details. Wish I had those several DOS disks and
backup disks and "data disks" (i.e. containing my own writing, or downloaded
files) from that era. But although I probably transferred some of that
to my  linux environment, I left that machine behind when I divorced,
already running linux on a somewhat early laptop. So it's all gone.


But here's to those intensely exciting days. For me, online has become
predictable, and thus uninteresting. I want to say that back in BBS-only
times only people with a brain could figure out how to play. Technology has
unfortunately, in my opinion) made it possible for any and every idiot to
participate. Too bad. And never mind the obscene commercialization, so that
my every move leads to gobs of advertising.

I heard someone begging for an explanation of what these things
called BBS's are. Well, a BBS, also known as a Bulletin Board
Systems.. Are where many of us started out.

BBS's started out in the 1970's, with modems at the blazing speed of 300 baud,
and people would fire up their large, slow, clunky computers,
start up their Terminal program. Qmodem, Ripterm, Hyperterm, Etc.
and they would dial up the BBS.

Some BBS's would start out with a big ANSI graphic, or some simply
just a login prompt. Once you were logged in, depending on the BBS
you were on, and the time frame of when you were calling, there
were a number of things you could do.

You could send private messages to other users on the system (Like email),
you could join the messages forums (Like Usenet), you could play online
games, like LORD, TradeWars 2002.. You could browse the file sections,
and download files. If the BBS had more than one phone line, you could
join chat, and talk to other people online. I grew up in a small town,
and the only BBS's we had, would have one or two phone lines.

Even back then there was still warez on the boards. Some BBS's specialized
in warez, and they would have their board up for leech access, and some
would require you to upload something to them. Most boards like that
would also dial out to other boards and exchange files.

BBS's also had something called FIDO net, and other types of networks
of messages. Some BBS's carried this, Most in the larger cities did,
and the Sysops (System Operators - Like an Admin) who didn't
mind spending some money on long distance, would dial out long distance
to get FIDOnet. Where the BBS basically would go out and exchange
special posting forums (like use net) with other BBS's that
were part of their network. This was a good way to get
messages out to the world. There were other popular nets like WWIVnet,
RIMEnet, VNet, and yes, even Usenet.

Then there started to be internet mail on BBS's, and you could send
mail to people on the internet.. Or send mail to other people on BBS's,
VIA the internet.. And basically you type up your message, send it
to your.friend@some.bbs.hostname.com, and it would send out over the internet,
and exchange with a internet mail server, which then gave it to the BBS.
Although it was often unreliable, it was still a good service to have.

Some people who had metered phones, or just couldn't tie up their phone
line all the time, could use things like QWK mail, which basically,
a user would dialin, goto the QWK menu, it would package all recent posts
up, and the user would download it. They could then disconnect from the BBS,
read and reply to all the posts they wanted to, dial back in, and it would
post their replies. Things like QWK were often encouraged by Sysops, because
many couldn't afford to have their lines tied up all day by one user.

Also to stop tying up users, almost ALL BBS's set time limits. A common
limit was 60 to 120 minutes.. And many were Pay BBS's, where you actually
bought you time, or could win time in games. Or in other Doors.

Doors were like a Door out of the system. All games were doors, and there
were other doors like Lottery, Fortune tellers, and things of that nature.
It was an external program called from the BBS, and then run. Some BBS's
would only have a couple doors, and some would have several dozen.

BBS's that had a lot of doors, often found their users abusing, and tying
up their lines. So logically, those were the same BBS's that usually
charged people.

There were Hack/Phreak boards everywhere.. In fact, some still exist today,
most can be logged into, from the internet. Where you could download
hacking utilities, and Phone scanners, and misc. files that other
hackers had written. Often BBS's would not seem to be into H/P things,
but would have special sections for it.

Special sections were areas that only people that were granted access,
could get into it. Either via a special password, or the Sysop setting
a flag, or adding them to a group that could get into it.

Most BBS's were stomped as the internet came about. The internet 
was graphical, and easier to use, and it was almost a 100% pay
service, so you were getting more, and everyone is in it
for the money.

BBS's always seemed kind of laid back, and maybe even cozy is the
word for it. It also could be, because everyone in their brother
weren't using them. Only a select few who could actually
operate their modem, and a term program. They weren't as easy,
and certainly weren't as pretty as the "Internet". But I certainly
wouldn't say the internet is better, or that BBS's are better.
You can't really compare the two. 
